Closes #268: admiralmetabolic release announcment (#269)
pharmaverse/blog: posts/zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_hello_admiralmetabolic/hello_admiralmetabolic!.qmd

---

> title: "Hello admiralmetabolic!"

Reviewer: Can we use here 
{admiralmetabolic}
instead? 
Not sure how it would look on the webpage though.

Author: I think it's ok, i've done it

author:
  - name: Anders Askeland
  - name: Edoardo Mancini
description: "We are happy to announce the release of the newest member of the {admiral} family - {admiralmetabolic}!"
# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.
date: "2024-12-01"
# Please do not use any non-default categories.
# You can find the default categories in the repository README.md
categories: [ADaM, Community, Technical]
# Feel free to change the image
image: "admiralmetabolic.png"

---

<!--------------- typical setup ----------------->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
long_slug <- "zzz_DO_NOT_EDIT_hello_admiralmetabolic"
library(link)
link::auto()
```

<!--------------- post begins here ----------------->

[![](admiralmetabolic.png){fig-align="center" width="220"}](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/index.html)

# Introduction

> The {admiral} team is excited to celebrate the newest addition to the our extension package family with the release {admiralmetabolic} 0.1! This new package focuses on the therapeutic areas of obesity and cardiovascular metabolism, and was borne out of a collaboration between Novo Nordisk and Roche, as well as a number of independent contributors. {admiralmetabolic} addresses a key unmet need in this area given the ever-increasing interest in obesity and cardiovascular metabolism across the industry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {admiral} team is excited to celebrate the newest addition to our extension package family with the release {admiralmetabolic} 0.1! This new package focuses on the therapeutic areas of obesity and cardiovascular metabolism, and was borne out of a collaboration between Novo Nordisk and Roche, as well as a number of independent contributors. {admiralmetabolic} addresses a key unmet need in this area given the ever-increasing interest in obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular metabolism across the industry.
```

From my perspective, I would love to implement various diabetes associated functionalities at some point as well.

> The {admiral} team is excited to celebrate the newest addition to the our extension package family with the release {admiralmetabolic} 0.1! This new package focuses on the therapeutic areas of obesity and cardiovascular metabolism, and was borne out of a collaboration between Novo Nordisk and Roche, as well as a number of independent contributors. {admiralmetabolic} addresses a key unmet need in this area given the ever-increasing interest in obesity and cardiovascular metabolism across the industry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {admiral} team is celebrating the newest addition to the extension package family with the release of {admiralmetabolic} 0.1! This new package focuses on the therapeutic areas of obesity and cardiovascular metabolism, and was born out of a collaboration between Novo Nordisk and Roche, as well as a number of independent contributors. {admiralmetabolic} addresses a key unmet need in this area given the ever-increasing interest in obesity and cardiovascular metabolism across the industry.
```

In this context it would be `born`, not `borne` according to the following site: 
https://quillbot.com/blog/commonly-confused-words/born-vs-borne/

# Package Contents

For this first 0.1 release, {admiralmetabolic} focuses primarily on the obesity indication. The package offers:

> * SDTM obesity-specific test data (to be moved to {pharmaversesdtm} at the next release of the package);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Obesity-specific SDTM test data (to be moved to {pharmaversesdtm} at the next release of the package);
```
reads nicer to me

* Two brand-new functions: admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() and admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip();
* Two vignettes for an [obesity vital signs ADaM ADVS](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/advs.html) and a [Control of Eating Questionnaire ADaM ADCOEQ](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html);
* Two template programs for [ADVS](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R) and [ADCOEQ](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_adcoeq.R) matching the corresponding vignettes.

## New Functions

> The first function, admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt(), is a wrapper to admiral::derive_param_computed() and enables users to add derived waist to height ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and height records. Here is an example of the function in action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first function, `admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt()`, is a wrapper to `admiral::derive_param_computed()` and enables users to add derived waist to height ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and height records. Here is an example of the function in action:
```

Don't know if we back-tick this?

Author: Not on the blog because we use auto-linking to link the documentation pages of functions instead.

```{r, eval = TRUE}
library(tibble)
library(admiralmetabolic)

> # Example 1: Derive Waist to Height Ratio where Height is measured only once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Derive Waist to Height Ratio. In this example height is measured only once per subject.
```

Author: Changed

> advs <- tribble(

Reviewer: can you align the columns? 
I have not seen the rendered page, is it aligned there?

Reviewer: This goes for all tribbles.

Author: Done

  ~USUBJID, ~PARAMCD, ~PARAM, ~AVAL, ~AVALU, ~VISIT,
  "01-101-1001", "HEIGHT", "Height (cm)", 147, "cm", "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1001", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 110, "cm", "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1001", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 108, "cm", "WEEK 2",
  "01-101-1001", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 107, "cm", "WEEK 3",
  "01-101-1002", "HEIGHT", "Height (cm)", 163, "cm", "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1002", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 120, "cm", "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1002", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 118, "cm", "WEEK 2",
  "01-101-1002", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (cm)", 117, "cm", "WEEK 3",
)

derive_param_waisthgt(
  advs,
  by_vars = exprs(USUBJID, VISIT),
  wstcir_code = "WSTCIR",
  height_code = "HEIGHT",
  set_values_to = exprs(
    PARAMCD = "WAISTHGT",
    PARAM = "Waist to Height Ratio"
  ),
  constant_by_vars = exprs(USUBJID),
  get_unit_expr = admiral::extract_unit(PARAM)
)
```

> Note that this function has built-in support to:
> 
> * Calculate the ratio in cases where units differ across the numerator and denominator by converting on the fly (allowed units: m, mm, ft, in);
> * Work in cases such as pediatric studies where both waist circumference and height are measured at multiple visits, by modifying the argument `constant_by_vars`. Please visit the function's reference page for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this function has built-in support for:

* Unit conversion in cases where units differ across the numerator and denominator (allowed units: m, mm, ft, in);
* Single or multiple height measurement by modifying the argument `constant_by_vars`. 

Please visit the function's reference page for more details.
```

For the constant_by_var, the default is actually that height is measured at every visit. Maybe this could be changed in the future, but I think we need to refer to it a different way to highlight this.

Author: updated

> admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip() is very similar: it is also a wrapper to admiral::derive_param_computed(), but this time enables users to add derived waist to hit ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and hip records. This function does not have the `constant_by_vars` parameter as the ratio is taken from two parameters that are measured at every visit, unlike for admiral::derive_param_waisthgt() where height could conceivably only be measured at screening for non pediatric trials. However, it boasts the same unit-flexibility as admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() - let's looks at that in action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip()` is very similar: it is also a wrapper to `admiral::derive_param_computed()`, but this time enables users to add derived waist to hit ratio parameters using waist- and hip circumference. It boasts the same unit-flexibility as `admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt()` - let's looks at that in action:
```

> admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip() is very similar: it is also a wrapper to admiral::derive_param_computed(), but this time enables users to add derived waist to hit ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and hip records. This function does not have the `constant_by_vars` parameter as the ratio is taken from two parameters that are measured at every visit, unlike for admiral::derive_param_waisthgt() where height could conceivably only be measured at screening for non pediatric trials. However, it boasts the same unit-flexibility as admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() - let's looks at that in action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip() is very similar: it is also a wrapper to admiral::derive_param_computed(), but this time enables users to add derived waist to hip ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and hip records. 
This function does not have the `constant_by_vars` parameter as the ratio is taken from two parameters that are measured at every visit, unlike for admiral::derive_param_waisthgt() where height could conceivably only be measured at screening for non pediatric trials. 
However, it boasts the same unit-flexibility as admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() - let's look at that in action:
```

On the {admiralmetabolic} package website, users will find the [obesity ADVS vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/advs.html). This documentation page will guide users towards creating an obesity ADVS ADaM, touching upon how to use our two new functions admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() and admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip() as well as how to apply existing {admiral} tools such as the brand-new (as of [admiral 1.2](https://pharmaverse.github.io/blog/posts/2025-01-17_1.2_admiral.../1.2_admiral_release.html)) admiral::derive_vars_cat() to create weight classes within the AVALCAT variable and admiral::derive_vars_crit_flag() to create criterion flag/variable pairs for endpoints such as a 5% reduction in weight at a certain visit.

Of course, this vignette is coupled with the [obesity ADVS template program](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R), which users can use as a starting point for their ADaM scripts. The template can also be loaded and saved directly from the R console by running:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
admiral::use_ad_template("ADVS", package = "admiralmetabolic")
```

> The [Control of Eating Questionnaire](https://licensing.leeds.ac.uk/product/control-of-eating-questionnaire-coeq) (COEQ) is used in many obesity trials as an endpoint. As such, {admiralmetabolic} also contains a second vignette geared towards the creation of an ADaM dataset ADCOEQ for the COEQ. Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, we saw no reason nor need to implement specific new functions for ADCOEQ. Indeed, functions such as admiral::derive_summary_records() can easily be employed to create ADCOEQ. Users are invited to visit the [vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [Control of Eating Questionnaire](https://licensing.leeds.ac.uk/product/control-of-eating-questionnaire-coeq) (COEQ) is used in many obesity trials as an endpoint. As such, {admiralmetabolic} also contains a vignette geared towards the creation of an ADaM dataset ADCOEQ for the COEQ. Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, functions such as admiral::derive_summary_records() can be employed to create ADCOEQ. Users are invited to visit the [vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 
```

> The [Control of Eating Questionnaire](https://licensing.leeds.ac.uk/product/control-of-eating-questionnaire-coeq) (COEQ) is used in many obesity trials as an endpoint. As such, {admiralmetabolic} also contains a second vignette geared towards the creation of an ADaM dataset ADCOEQ for the COEQ. Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, we saw no reason nor need to implement specific new functions for ADCOEQ. Indeed, functions such as admiral::derive_summary_records() can easily be employed to create ADCOEQ. Users are invited to visit the [vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Control of Eating Questionnaire](https://licensing.leeds.ac.uk/product/control-of-eating-questionnaire-coeq) (COEQ) is used in many obesity trials as an endpoint. {admiralmetabolic} provides an additional vignette geared towards the creation of an ADaM dataset ADCOEQ for the COEQ. Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, we saw no need to implement specific new functions for ADCOEQ. 
Indeed, functions such as admiral::derive_summary_records() can easily be employed to create ADCOEQ. 
Users are invited to visit the [ADCOEQ vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 
```

Reviewer: linebreaks are added for easier feedback :)

Once again, this vignette comes hand-in-hand with the [ADCOEQ program](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R), which can be accessed through the link above or directly from the R console by running:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
admiral::use_ad_template("ADCOEQ", package = "admiralmetabolic")
```

# Conclusion

> We love growing the {admiral} family, and hope you are just as excited about {admiralmetabolic} as we are, and welcome any community feedback about the package, its contents and development directions for future releases. The development team will be meeting in the next month for a retrospective and a plan for the next release, so please reach out! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We love growing the {admiral} family, and hope you are just as excited about {admiralmetabolic} as we are. We welcome any community feedback about the package, its contents and development directions for future releases. The development team will be meeting in the next month for a retrospective and a plan for the next release, so please reach out! 
```

Author: updated

> We love growing the {admiral} family, and hope you are just as excited about {admiralmetabolic} as we are, and welcome any community feedback about the package, its contents and development directions for future releases. The development team will be meeting in the next month for a retrospective and a plan for the next release, so please reach out! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We love growing the {admiral} family, and hope you are just as excited about {admiralmetabolic} as we are.
We welcome community feedback about the package, its content and development directions for future releases. The development team will be meeting next month for a retrospective and a plan for the next release, so please reach out! 
```

Reviewer: Unclear how people should reach out. 
Easiest would be to give one or two specific options. I.e. if you share via linkedin, tell them to contact you directly via linkedin or just to create an issue on github.

> Finally, if you have any suggestion new extension packages, or indeed would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to any member of the {admiral} team and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, if you have any suggestion new extension packages, or would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to any member of the {admiral} team and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.
```

> Finally, if you have any suggestion new extension packages, or indeed would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to any member of the {admiral} team and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, if you have any suggestion for new extension packages, or indeed would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to any member of the {admiral} team and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.
```
Would be great to link to members here, or to the page with the members.

Author: Added

---
title: "Hello {admiralmetabolic}!"
author:
  - name: Anders Askeland
  - name: Edoardo Mancini
description: "We are happy to announce the release of the newest member of the {admiral} family - {admiralmetabolic}!"
# Note that the date below will be auto-updated when the post is merged.

> date: "2024-12-01"

Reviewer 2: Should probably be updated before merging?

# Package Contents

For this first 0.1 release, {admiralmetabolic} focuses primarily on the obesity indication. The package offers:

* Obesity-specific SDTM test data (to be moved to {pharmaversesdtm} at the next release of the package);
* Two brand-new functions: admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() and admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip();
* Two vignettes for an [obesity vital signs ADaM ADVS](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/advs.html) and a [Control of Eating Questionnaire ADaM ADCOEQ](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html);
* Two template programs for [ADVS](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R) and [ADCOEQ](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_adcoeq.R) matching the corresponding vignettes.

## New Functions

> The first function, admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt(), is a wrapper to admiral::derive_param_computed() and enables users to add derived waist to height ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and height records. Here is an example of the function in action:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first function, `admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt()`, is a wrapper to `admiral::derive_param_computed()` and enables users to add derived waist to height ratio parameters to a vital signs ADVS ADaM using waist circumference and height records. Here is an example of the function in action:
```

Reviewer: I think Edoardo wrote how it is suggested by the {link} package that we use for formatting packages and functions.

Author: Leaving as is as the link package will auto-create links for functions 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/81ae7131-d541-44cc-8829-bcad8b0ea02c)

```{r, eval = TRUE}
advs2 <- tribble(
  ~USUBJID,      ~PARAMCD, ~PARAM,                     ~AVAL, ~AVALU, ~VISIT,
  "01-101-1001", "HIPCIR", "Hip Circumference (cm)",   125,   "cm",   "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1001", "HIPCIR", "Hip Circumference (cm)",   124,   "cm",   "WEEK 2",
  "01-101-1001", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (in)", 43.31, "in",   "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1001", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (in)", 42.52, "in",   "WEEK 2",
  "01-101-1002", "HIPCIR", "Hip Circumference (cm)",   135,   "cm",   "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1002", "HIPCIR", "Hip Circumference (cm)",   133,   "cm",   "WEEK 2",
  "01-101-1002", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (in)", 47.24, "in",   "SCREENING",
  "01-101-1002", "WSTCIR", "Waist Circumference (in)", 46.46, "in",   "WEEK 2"
)

derive_param_waisthip(
  advs2,
  by_vars = exprs(USUBJID, VISIT),
  wstcir_code = "WSTCIR",
  hipcir_code = "HIPCIR",
  set_values_to = exprs(
    PARAMCD = "WAISTHIP",
    PARAM = "Waist to Hip Ratio"
  ),
  get_unit_expr = admiral::extract_unit(PARAM)
)
```

## Vignettes and Template

> On the {admiralmetabolic} package website, users will find the [obesity ADVS vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/advs.html). This documentation page will guide users towards creating an obesity ADVS ADaM, touching upon how to use our two new functions admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt() and admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip() as well as how to apply existing {admiral} tools such as the brand-new (as of [admiral 1.2](https://pharmaverse.github.io/blog/posts/2025-01-17_1.2_admiral.../1.2_admiral_release.html)) admiral::derive_vars_cat() to create weight classes within the AVALCAT variable and admiral::derive_vars_crit_flag() to create criterion flag/variable pairs for endpoints such as a 5% reduction in weight at a certain visit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the {admiralmetabolic} package website, users will find the [obesity ADVS vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/advs.html). This documentation page will guide users towards creating an obesity ADVS ADaM, touching upon how to use our two new functions `admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthgt()` and `admiralmetabolic::derive_param_waisthip()` as well as how to apply existing {admiral} tools such as the brand-new (as of [admiral 1.2](https://pharmaverse.github.io/blog/posts/2025-01-17_1.2_admiral.../1.2_admiral_release.html)) `admiral::derive_vars_cat()` to create weight classes within the AVALCAT variable and admiral::derive_vars_crit_flag() to create criterion flag/variable pairs for endpoints such as a 5% reduction in weight at a certain visit.
```

Of course, this vignette is coupled with the [obesity ADVS template program](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R), which users can use as a starting point for their ADaM scripts. The template can also be loaded and saved directly from the R console by running:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
admiral::use_ad_template("ADVS", package = "admiralmetabolic")
```

The [Control of Eating Questionnaire](https://licensing.leeds.ac.uk/product/control-of-eating-questionnaire-coeq) (COEQ) is used in many obesity trials as an endpoint. As such, {admiralmetabolic} also contains a vignette geared towards the creation of an ADaM dataset ADCOEQ for the COEQ. 

> Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, functions such as admiral::derive_summary_records() can be employed to create ADCOEQ. Users are invited to visit the [vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Due to the flexibility of the parent {admiral} package, functions such as `admiral::derive_summary_records()` can be employed to create ADCOEQ. Users are invited to visit the [vignette](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiralmetabolic/articles/adcoeq.html) for more details and a full walkthrough. 
```

Once again, this vignette comes hand-in-hand with the [ADCOEQ program](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic/blob/main/inst/templates/ad_advs.R), which can be accessed through the link above or directly from the R console by running:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
admiral::use_ad_template("ADCOEQ", package = "admiralmetabolic")
```

# Conclusion

We love growing the {admiral} family, and hope you are just as excited about {admiralmetabolic} as we are.
We welcome community feedback about the package, its content and development directions for future releases. Please raise your feedback as issues or discussions in our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/pharmaverse/admiralmetabolic) or the [pharmaverse slack](https://join.slack.com/t/pharmaverse/shared_invite/zt-yv5atkr4-Np2ytJ6W_QKz_4Olo7Jo9A). The development team will be meeting next month for a retrospective and a plan for the next release, so please reach out! 

> Finally, if you have any suggestion new extension packages, or would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to the {admiral} Business Lead, Edoardo Mancini and/or the Technical Lead, Ben Straub through the [pharmaverse slack](https://join.slack.com/t/pharmaverse/shared_invite/zt-yv5atkr4-Np2ytJ6W_QKz_4Olo7Jo9A) and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, if you have any suggestions for new extension packages, or would like to drive one yourself, please reach out to the {admiral} Business Lead, Edoardo Mancini and/or the Technical Lead, Ben Straub through the [pharmaverse slack](https://join.slack.com/t/pharmaverse/shared_invite/zt-yv5atkr4-Np2ytJ6W_QKz_4Olo7Jo9A) and we'd be happy to discuss next steps with you.
```
